---
layout: post
title:  "Using dry-monad"
date:   2018-03-19 09:33:00
categories: ruby monad
---

> I originally wrote this as a getting started guide for other engineers at
> the company I was working at. I'm posting it here for archival purposes.

Imagine that we have an application where user's have a location. We
want to find the weather for their current location using an external
service call. We want to provide this functionality in a json api. A basic
implementation might look like this.

```ruby
def create
  user = User.find(params[:id])
  location = user.location
  if location
    zip = location.zip_code
    Circuit.circuit(:weather)
      .command { 
          weather = WeatherAPI.current_weather(zip)
          render json: { current_weather: weather }
      }
      .fallback { render json {errors: "Couldn't talk to weather"} }
      .run
  else
    render json: { errors: "No location" }
  end
rescue ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound => e
  render json: { errors: "User not found" } 
end
```

There are multiple places where this code can fail and depending on that
failure we need to take different actions. We may want to halt execution
or render specific errors.

An even more incidious problem is that none of the logic in this action is
re-usable. All of our logic for gathering data, acting on that data, and
returning results is coupled together.

We want to decouple the core logic of looking up a users weather report
from the controller logic of rendering json. This allows our weather
lookup code to be more reusable and easier to test. A first pass might
look something like this.

```ruby
module WeatherLookup
  class Result
    attr_reader :value

    def initialize(value, success)
      @value = value
      @success = success
    end

    def success?
      @success
    end
  end

  def self.for_user(user_id)
    user = User.find(user_id)
    location = user.location
    if location
      zip = location.zip_code
      Circuit.circuit(:weather)
        .command { 
            weather = WeatherAPI.current_weather(zip)
            Result.new(weather, true)
        }
        .fallback { Result.new("Weather api is down", false) }
        .run
    else
      Result.new("No location", false)
    end
  rescue ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound => e
    Result.new("No user", false)
  end
end

def create
  result = WeatherLookup.for_user(params[:id])

  if result.success?
    render json: { current_weather: result.value }
  else
    render json: { errors: result.value }
  end
end
```

Our module can now return a `Result` type and the controller can decide
what it wants to do with that result. What we've really done here is
_inverted control_ of this operation and given the control back to the
caller. This refactor certainly cleans up the controller code. But our new
weather module could still use some work.

## Results

It turns out that our `Result` class is remarkably close to a very common
pattern. This pattern is nicely encapsulated in the dry-monads gem. Using
the gem we can re-factor our code like so.

```ruby
def create
  result = WeatherLookup.for_user(params[:id])
    
  if result.success?
    render json: { current_weather: result.value! }
  else
    render json: { errors: result.failure }
  end
end

module WeatherLookup
  def self.for_user(user_id)
    Try(ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound) { User.find(params[:id]) }
      .to_maybe
      .fmap { |user| user.location }
      .fmap { |location| location.zip_code }
      .bind { |zip| get_weather(zip) }
  end

  def self.get_weather(zip)
    Circuit.circuit(:weather)
      .command { Success(WeatherAPI.current_weather(zip)) }
      .fallback { Failure("The weather api is down") }
      .run
  end
end
```

Each of our seperate actions now returns either a `Success` or
a `Failure`. Both of these define a common interface which allows
operations to be composed together using the functions `fmap` and `bind`.
While these names aren't very descriptive the functions are actually
straightforward.

`fmap` allows you to take a value out of its context (in this case our
`Result`), apply a function to the unwrapped value, and then place it back
inside the context.

`bind` provides a way to take a `Result` and apply a function on it that
returns a new `Result`. In our example the `WeatherAPI` call will return
a `Success` or `Failure` depending on if the circuit has been broken or
not. We can use `bind` to compose this method with the result of getting
a users zip code.

The magic of this interface is that the blocks passed to `fmap` and `bind`
will only be called if the `Result` is a `Success`. If the `Result` is
a `Failure` then both `fmap` and `bind` return the `Failure` and won't
yield the block. What this means in practice is that if any of our
operations fail the rest of the operations will be skipped and we'll
return the original failure. For instance if a user doesn't have
a location then we'll return `None` and skip looking up the zip code and
making a weather api call.

## Interfaces and Monads

`fmap` and `bind` aren't specific to the `Result` type. They're part of
a more generic interface known as a Monad. There are several other types
of monads including Maybe, List, and State. For our purposes we'll mostly
be concerned with Results and Maybes.

The power of this interface is that it allows for easy composition of
operations. If we wanted to provide clothing recommendations for a user
based on their current weather we could do something like this:

```ruby
 def recommendations
  result = WeatherLookup
    .for_user(params[:id])
    .bind { |weather| ProductRecommender.for_weather(weather) }
    
  if result.success?
    render json: { clothes: result.value! }
  else
    render json: { errors: result.failure }
  end
end
```

Looking up a users weather is completely decoupled from any sort of
product recommendations. Using our interface we're able to compose and
extend functionality without sacrificing the re-usability of these
functions.

## Conclusion

The Monad interface provides a powerful tool for composing small,
side-effecting operations. My hope is that this gives you a better
understanding of how they work and how we might benefit from them.

The documentation for the dry-monads gem is here: [http://dry-rb.org/gems/dry-monads/](http://dry-rb.org/gems/dry-monads/)

If you wanna learn more about the theory behind Functors and Monads then
this is a great resource:
[http://adit.io/posts/2013-04-17-functors,_applicatives,_and_monads_in_pictures.html](http://adit.io/posts/2013-04-17-functors,_applicatives,_and_monads_in_pictures.html).
